README.md, before:



![](./logo/logo.png)

> A flexible and efficient framework for data-driven stochastic disease spread simulations

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/stewid/SimInf.svg)](https://travis-ci.org/stewid/SimInf)
[![Build status](https://ci.appveyor.com/api/projects/status/pe68xiu1anxvet2n?svg=true)](https://ci.appveyor.com/project/stewid/SimInf)
[![CRAN status](http://www.r-pkg.org/badges/version/SimInf)](http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/SimInf/index.html)
[![CRAN RStudio mirror downloads](http://cranlogs.r-pkg.org/badges/last-month/SimInf)](http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/SimInf/index.html)
[![Coverage Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/stewid/SimInf/badge.svg?branch=master&service=github)](https://coveralls.io/github/stewid/SimInf?branch=master)

# SimInf

Livestock movements are important for the spread of many infectious
diseases between herds. The package provides an efficient and flexible
framework for data-driven stochastic disease spread modelling that
integrates within-herd infection dynamics as continuous-time Markov
chains and livestock movements between herds as scheduled events. The
core simulation solver is implemented in C and uses OpenMP (if
available) to divide work over multiple processors. The package
contains template models and can be extended with user defined models.

## Installation

To install the latest release on CRAN


```r
install.packages("SimInf")
```

To install the development version of `SimInf`, it's easiest to use
the devtools package:


```r
# install.packages("devtools")
library(devtools)
install_github("stewid/SimInf"")
```

Another alternative is to use `git` and `make`


```r
$ git clone https://github.com/stewid/SimInf.git
$ cd SimInf
$ make install
```

### Dependencies

#### On a Debian based system

Before installing `SimInf` you need to install
[The GNU Scientific Library](http://www.gnu.org/software/gsl/) (GSL).


```r
apt-get install libgsl0-dev
```

You may need to do:

```r
sudo apt-get install libgsl0-dev
```

#### On a Windows machine

To install the development version of `SimInf` you first need to
download and install
[Rtools](http://cran.r-project.org/bin/windows/Rtools/)

# Authors

* Pavol Bauer (Uppsala University, Sweden)
* Stefan Engblom (Uppsala University, Sweden)
* Stefan Widgren (National Veterinary Institute, Sweden) **(Maintainer)**

# Acknowledgments

This work was financially supported by the Swedish Research Council
within the UPMARC Linnaeus centre of Excellence (Pavol Bauer and
Stefan Engblom), the Swedish Research Council Formas (Stefan Engblom
and Stefan Widgren), the Swedish Board of Agriculture (Stefan
Widgren), and by the Swedish strategic research program eSSENCE
(Stefan Widgren).

# License

The `SimInf` package is licensed under the GPLv3.

- [LICENSE](LICENSE) - `SimInf` package license

Any suggestions, bug reports, forks and pull requests are
appreciated. Get in touch.

Commit message:

Added Robin to author list

README.md, after:



![](./logo/logo.png)

> A flexible and efficient framework for data-driven stochastic disease spread simulations

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/stewid/SimInf.svg)](https://travis-ci.org/stewid/SimInf)
[![Build status](https://ci.appveyor.com/api/projects/status/pe68xiu1anxvet2n?svg=true)](https://ci.appveyor.com/project/stewid/SimInf)
[![CRAN status](http://www.r-pkg.org/badges/version/SimInf)](http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/SimInf/index.html)
[![CRAN RStudio mirror downloads](http://cranlogs.r-pkg.org/badges/last-month/SimInf)](http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/SimInf/index.html)
[![Coverage Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/stewid/SimInf/badge.svg?branch=master&service=github)](https://coveralls.io/github/stewid/SimInf?branch=master)

# SimInf

Livestock movements are important for the spread of many infectious
diseases between herds. The package provides an efficient and flexible
framework for data-driven stochastic disease spread modelling that
integrates within-herd infection dynamics as continuous-time Markov
chains and livestock movements between herds as scheduled events. The
core simulation solver is implemented in C and uses OpenMP (if
available) to divide work over multiple processors. The package
contains template models and can be extended with user defined models.

## Installation

To install the latest release on CRAN


```r
install.packages("SimInf")
```

To install the development version of `SimInf`, it's easiest to use
the devtools package:


```r
# install.packages("devtools")
library(devtools)
install_github("stewid/SimInf"")
```

Another alternative is to use `git` and `make`


```r
$ git clone https://github.com/stewid/SimInf.git
$ cd SimInf
$ make install
```

### Dependencies

#### On a Debian based system

Before installing `SimInf` you need to install
[The GNU Scientific Library](http://www.gnu.org/software/gsl/) (GSL).


```r
apt-get install libgsl0-dev
```

You may need to do:

```r
sudo apt-get install libgsl0-dev
```

#### On a Windows machine

To install the development version of `SimInf` you first need to
download and install
[Rtools](http://cran.r-project.org/bin/windows/Rtools/)

# Authors

* Pavol Bauer (Uppsala University, Sweden)
* Robin Eriksson (Uppsala University, Sweden)
* Stefan Engblom (Uppsala University, Sweden)
* Stefan Widgren (National Veterinary Institute, Sweden) **(Maintainer)**

# Acknowledgments

This work was financially supported by the Swedish Research Council
within the UPMARC Linnaeus centre of Excellence (Pavol Bauer, Robin Eriksson,
and Stefan Engblom), the Swedish Research Council Formas (Stefan Engblom
and Stefan Widgren), the Swedish Board of Agriculture (Stefan
Widgren), and by the Swedish strategic research program eSSENCE
(Stefan Widgren).

# License

The `SimInf` package is licensed under the GPLv3.

- [LICENSE](LICENSE) - `SimInf` package license

Any suggestions, bug reports, forks and pull requests are
appreciated. Get in touch.
